Update the article on Cypher Injections (#170)
neo4j-documentation/knowledge-base: articles/modules/ROOT/pages/protecting-against-cypher-injection.adoc

This is a cousin to SQL injection, but affects our Cypher query language.

A great illustration demonstrating SQL injection is from the XKCD comic featuring Little Bobby Tables:

[link=https://xkcd.com/327/]
image::https://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/exploits_of_a_mom.png[Little Bobby Tables]

The comic shows a mother who has named her child `Robert'; DROP TABLE STUDENTS;--`, ensuring that if his name was appended to an SQL statement,
through string concatenation with no protections against injection attacks, that the additional quote would close the opened quote from the application,
the semicolon would finish the statement, and the `--` would comment out the rest of the query, so that syntax errors could be avoided.

Given that Bobby’s mother would likely have continued her crusade, her next child might be named to target Cypher, used by the leading graph database Neo4j.
Let’s call them Little Robby Labels.

`"Robby' WITH DISTINCT true as haxxored MATCH (s:Student) DETACH DELETE s; //"`

This is an attempt at Cypher Injection, the equivalent of the SQL Injection attack, but with the deletion of all :Student nodes instead.

> The `WITH` clause in the middle is to ensure the result set is reduced to a single row before deleting all students.

Reviewer: it's not the result set, it's the intermediate cardinality that's reduced

Reviewer 2: I would perhaps consider replacing the example with something simpler, and then just explain that the with statement is there to more easily append and insert our injection snippet. 
```
`"Robby' WITH true AS n MATCH (s:Student) DETACH DELETE s; //"`
```

Not sure how much value is adds to introduce the concept of reducing intermediate record sets to begin with 🤔

Author: Okay, I think I'll simplify it as you suggest Daniel :)

> = Protecting against Cypher injection

Reviewer 3: There are still many places where Cypher Injection is not capitalized.

:slug: protecting-against-cypher-injection
:author: Andrew Bowman, Gemma Lamont

> :neo4j-versions: 3.5, 4.0, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 5.x

Reviewer 2: Might be good to remove the old versions prior to 4.4 and 5.x? 

The reason I mention this is because the Cypher compiler went from a Scala compiler to a Java compiler during this time, and there were many small inconsistencies in the escaping algorithm (Michael Simmons can tell you all about it).

:tags: cypher, security
:category: security

== What is Cypher injection?

Cypher injection is a way for maliciously formatted input to jump out of its context, and by altering the query itself, hijack the query and perform unexpected operations on the database.

This is a cousin to SQL injection, but affects our Cypher query language.

A great illustration demonstrating SQL injection is from the XKCD comic featuring Little Bobby Tables:

[link=https://xkcd.com/327/]
image::https://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/exploits_of_a_mom.png[Little Bobby Tables]

The comic shows a mother who has named her child `Robert'; DROP TABLE STUDENTS;--`, ensuring that if his name was appended to an SQL statement,
through string concatenation with no protections against injection attacks, that the additional quote would close the opened quote from the application,
the semicolon would finish the statement, and the `--` would comment out the rest of the query, so that syntax errors could be avoided.

Given that Bobby’s mother would likely have continued her crusade, her next child might be named to target Cypher, used by the leading graph database Neo4j.
Let’s call him Little Robby Labels.

> `"Robby' WITH DISTINCT true as haxxored MATCH (s:Student) DETACH DELETE s //"`

Reviewer 2: Not sure if the references to Robby are intentional or if it's a typo that lived on. The original comic is about Bobby, and we reference Bobby quite a lot in this article too?

> `"Robby' WITH DISTINCT true as haxxored MATCH (s:Student) DETACH DELETE s //"`

Reviewer 3: I think you haven't updated this one yet. Probably needs to be done for other statements, too.

----

The query that will be run is:

[source,cypher]
----
CREATE (s:Student) SET s.name = 'Robby' WITH DISTINCT true as haxxored MATCH (s:Student) DETACH DELETE s //';
----

After the Robby node is created, all :Student nodes are found and deleted.

== Types of Injection Attacks

In the previous example we showed how Little Robby could ruin your day by deleting all the data in the database.
But this is not the only way a malicious actor can exploit queries by injection.

=== Information disclosure

A possible injection vector is when the malicious input aims to read information that they should not have access to.

For example; the attack payload of:

> `Robby' OR 1=1 RETURN apoc.text.join(collect(n.username), ',') //`

Reviewer 4: The `apoc.text.join(collect(n.username), ',')` attack doesn't make sense here, since there is no `n` variable anywhere in the query. 

The warning below says that this returns the names of all users in the database, but there's nothing in the query that relates `n` to database users. The query itself would need to include more for this to make sense or to even be able to compile without error.

Might execute as;

[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (s:Student) WHERE s.name = 'Robby' OR 1=1 RETURN apoc.text.join(collect(n.username), ',') //' RETURN s.name;
----

Returning the names of all the users in the database in one comma separated string.
For this method to succeed, the client application needs to be vulnerable to injection as well as sending back the results of the query to the user.

=== Blind Injection

Blind injection is when the attacker doesn't aim to fetch the disclosed information from the client response directly, but may obtain it in a different way.

One way this is done is by reacting to the behavior of the application. Let's assume that a website loads a different page based on the existence result of a query.
For example a login page first asks for an email and will then display either a login to continue page or a register to continue page.

> `MATCH (u) WHERE user.email = '{email}' RETURN u IS NOT NULL;`

Reviewer 4: The variables used MUST be consistent. This mixes up `u` and `user` variables, such that this example will error out and cannot be run.

== Protecting against Cypher Injection using Parameters

When receiving user input, it is possible to prevent Cypher Injection by using parameters.

In the above example, instead of concatenating the students name with the `CREATE` query, one should use parameters instead:

`:param name => "Robby' WITH DISTINCT true as haxxored MATCH (s:Student) DETACH DELETE s //"`

The parameterized query would look like this:

[source,cypher]
----
CREATE (s:Student)
SET s.name = $studentName
----

When using parameters like this, it is impossible for the parameter, in part of whole, to escape the query, stopping any attempts at Cypher Injection.

This is because parameters are separate from the query. The query alone is compiled into an executable plan, and once compiled, can use any parameter map for execution.

In other words, once a query plan has been compiled, it is set, and nothing in the data submitted to it can change it, alter it, or hijack it.

This type of protection is the easiest and safest way to protect against Cypher Injection on literals, unfortunately, not everything in a query is parameterizable.

> == Parameters and APOC

Reviewer 2: This is the typo of info we will also be including the Security Guidance page in APOC. We can keep it in both areas, although you may ultimately wish to include a link to the APOC Guidance page.

Author: I think it is good to have here as well :) I agree about adding the link, we can do that at a later point! I'll make a note on the APOC guidance page ticket

Sanitization should always be done when accepting untrusted external input and may be needed other times, see second order injections for more information.

It is recommended that this sanitization is done at the client level, before passing it down to the database.

=== Escape Characters

Escape characters invoke an alternative meaning on the following characters in the sequence.
In Cypher, the definition of string literals, regular expressions and naming of types such as node labels can be done
with the opening and closing of certain characters that can also be used inside the expression given it is escaped correctly.

In all cases, a backslash is escaped using another backslash.

==== String Literals

String literals are started and ended with either a single quote `'` or a double quote `"`.
These can be escaped using a backslash `\`.

==== Regular Expressions

Regular expressions are started and ended with a single quote `'` which can be escaped using a backslash.

==== Naming

Node labels, relationship types, parameters and variables can be started and ended with a single backtick ```,

> the backtick is escaped using another backtick ```.

Reviewer 2: – node labels
- relationship types
- parameters
- variables
- **map keys**
- **functions names**

For more information on escape characters, see the Cypher Manual on https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/syntax/expressions/[Expressions]
and https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/syntax/naming/[Naming rules and recommendations].

=== When Sanitization is Necessary

Node labels, relationship types and parameters may contain non-alphabetic characters, including numbers, symbols and whitespace characters, but must be escaped using backticks.
For example: `node label with spaces`.
This means that when dynamically building a query using string concatenation, sanitization needs to be done on the escaping of backticks.
In Cypher, a backtick is escaped using another backtick `&#96;&#96;`.

Here is an example of a simple dynamic label injection attack:

`query = "MATCH (s:School)-[:IN]->(c:&#96;" + cityName + "&#96;) RETURN s;`

With this query we want to search for all schools that are in a certain city, unfortunately our city names are Node Labels,

> so it isn't possible to parameterize the input.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps one advice would be to avoid the situation where you need to escape names altogether. And this can probably be achieved by changing the data model, which seems like a very good approach to me.

In this example, instead of having one label per city, you'd have the City label with the schema (name: String) and then users would do `MATCH (c: City { name: $cityName }) RETURN name`. 

I have definitely seen many examples of "bad data modelling" such as this in the query logs of people using apoc.cypher.run to make use of dynamic labels.

I don't think this type of modelling is particularly great. And a little bit of trivia is that the Neo4j dbms only has ~60000 labels names possible which is another reason not to model data this way 🙈 

Let me know what you think.

> so it isn't possible to parameterize the input.

Reviewer 4: Unfortunately dynamic labels are still something we see from time to time. 

In some cases, this kind of modeling is necessary due to limitations of the product. For example, Max De Marzi's AiportDay graph uses labels for airport + day concatenated, as modeling this way leads to massive performance improvements because filtering on all the relationships of an Airport node by a day property on a relationship isn't performant. If we later get node-centric indexes then there would be no need for such a bizarre model, but until then such design choices remain the only way to get acceptable performance.

> so it isn't possible to parameterize the input.

Author: I think it makes sense to add a comment recommending that the user update their model if possible, in terms of security advice it is good, then the rest of the article still helps in the case where they need it for performance reasons! :)

> so it isn't possible to parameterize the input.

Reviewer 4: Agreed!

A possible attack input would be:

> `Input = &#96;) RETURN 1 as a UNION MATCH (n) RETURN 1 WITH DISTINCT true AS haxxored MATCH (n) DETACH DELETE n; \\`

Reviewer 2: These examples using `&#96;` are perhaps a little confusing. But I suspect this could also just be a rendering bug of some sort?

Author: In adoc, backticks denote a code block. So to get around that (and the weird escaping rules) one uses the html entity instead :) Just a type of encoding, it displays as a backtick!

The backtick escapes the label name context and the parentheses closes the node.
The `UNION` here then ensures that a match is made, as if the first `MATCH` statement doesn't return anything, the next part of the query won't be run.

> The `WITH` reduces the result set down to one row and then the final part will delete everything in the database.

Reviewer 2: The example with the UNION introduces a new concept that has to be explained. Perhaps this could be simplified?

This attack was not possible to avoid using parameterization.
To avoid this attack sanitization must be used.

> It is possible to add validation to the query as well, in this case, validating the city name is a real city name before passing it into the database, and rejecting it otherwise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is possible to add validation to the user input (?) as well, in this case, validating the city name is a real city name before passing it into the database, and rejecting it otherwise.
```

The sanitization needed for this query is escaping the additional backtick character.

`SanitizedInput = &#96;&#96;) RETURN 1 as a UNION MATCH (n) RETURN 1 WITH DISTINCT true AS haxxored MATCH (n) DETACH DELETE n; \\`

The additional backtick added now ensures that the entire string is used as the node label, and not able to break out of that context.

The unicode character for the bactick; `\u0060` will also resolve to a backtick and needs to be sanitized.
When handling user input, it is important that the programming language the client is written in is taken into account.
For example, the input: `\u005C\u00750060` may be resolved before being passed to the database as `\u0060`

> (`\u005C` is backslash, `\`, and `\u0075` is u), which will then be resolved by the database as a backtick!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(`\u005C` is backslash `\`, and `\u0075` is `u`), which will then be resolved by the database as a backtick!
```

Writing your own sanitization function can be tricky.
That is why it is highly recommended to avoid string concatenation and design your database in such a way that user input
is not needed to dynamically query based on node labels, relationship types and parameters.

It is also important to remember that not all injection attacks rely on quotation escaping of string literals,
for example the following query, for a number literal, is still vulnerable when not using parameterization.

`query = "MATCH (n) WHERE n.id =" + userid + ";"`

> Where the malicious userid input is: `"1 OR 1 = 1 WITH DISTINCT true AS haxxored MATCH (all) DETACH DELETE all; //"`

Reviewer 2: This should probably be higher up, when discussing at a high level what type of input needs to be sanitised. Currently it is hidden away within the naming section.

Author: Fair enough!

> === Validation and Sanitization common Exploits

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Validation and Sanitization Common Exploits
```

Sanitization can also be used as a technique to clean up user input.
Another way of keeping the input safe and clean is to use validation.
Validation checks the input and makes sure it meets a set of certain criteria and will reject the input if it does not,
in comparison to sanitization which cleans the input only.
Validation can be used alongside sanitization, keep in mind that both techniques come with risks.

=== Whitespace checks

Checking user input for whitespace sounds like a good way to avoid injection, and in some cases it would work,
consider the example:

`"Robby' MATCH (s:Student) DETACH DELETE s //"`

A validation check for whitespace would flag this query as invalid, but checking for whitespace alone isn’t enough.
In Cypher using block comments to replace whitespaces is also valid, the following query would, therefore, pass whitespace validation checks:

> `"Robby'/&#42;&#42;/MATCH/&#42;&#42;/(s:Student)/&#42;&#42;/DETACH/&#42;&#42;/DELETE/&#42;&#42;/s/&#42;&#42;///"`

Reviewer 2: I'm thinking this is an encoding error when copying from Google doc to .adoc

Author: As mentioned earlier, this is intentional to get around asciidocs formatting :) just the html entity encoding of the character!

Checking for and cleaning up whitespace may be useful for your application, but shouldn't be relied upon as a secure way of avoiding Cypher injection.

=== Unicode Encoding

Another common exploit around input validation and sanitization is unicode encoding.
Unicode encoding is where characters are encoded into their unicode equivalent.
For example; the single quote character `'` can be encoded as `\u0027`.
When sanitizing a string for the removal of escape quotation characters, it is important to also check for the unicode equivalent.
The following query doesn't look like it escapes the string at first glance:

`"Robby\u0027 MATCH (s:Student) DETACH DELETE s //"`

But in reality, Cypher will resolve the unicode into a single quote and treat it as such in the compilation of the query.

As mentioned earlier, malicious users may double encode their unicode input by additionally encoding the backslash, `\`, and `u`,
which allows that to be resolved first in your client application code, and then resolved as the actual attack in the database.

> For example; `\u005C\u00750027` may be sent to the database as the input `\u0027`, thus successfully escaping the single quotation.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps the section described earlier could be merged into this one, as explaining the same idea twice is a little repetitious?

Author: Fair enough :)

When it comes to the validation of input such as usernames, it is often done to avoid the use of reserved keywords, such as admin.
Unicode encoding can be used as another common bypass for this.
For example the user input `\u0061\u0064\u006d\u0069\u006e` is the unicode for `admin`:

[source,cypher]
----
CREATE (n {username: '\u0061\u0064\u006d\u0069\u006e'}) RETURN n.username
----

.Results
[opts="header"]
|===
|n.username
|"Admin"
|===

=== String Concatenation

Another method to bypass validation of particular keywords is using string concatenation in the injection.
For example, validation that the user isn’t setting their username to admin could be bypassed with the injection:

`"ad' + 'min'"`

=== Second Order Injections

A second order injection occurs when the input is successfully filtered and sanitized the first time it is used and is
then stored in the database, when the application uses the value another time, the malicious code is then executed.

For example; Little Robby Labels sets up an account with a username and password:

> `Username: LilRob' OR 1=1 WITH true AS hacked MATCH (a) DETACH DELETE ALL; –`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`LilRob' OR 1=1 WITH true AS hacked MATCH (a) DETACH DELETE ALL; –`
```

Reviewer 4: Inconsistent variables used between `a` and `ALL`, need to decide on only one for the entire example for consistency.

Reviewer 4: Also a single dash is not a valid comment character, so the remaining query would error out. Maybe that would still let the attack succeed, but in general we should use the correct characters to comment out the remaining Cypher.

Author: oops started doing SQL haha clearly read too many articles :) Will fix up the naming inconsistencies!

As the username is received from the user directly, our application runs sanitization on it, escaping the quotation mark.

[source,cypher]
----
CREATE (u:User) SET u.username = 'LilRob\' OR 1=1 WITH true AS hacked MATCH (a) DETACH DELETE ALL; –';
----

Little Robby Tables now resets their password and as the username is assumed to be safe our application runs sanitization only the new password:

> 

Reviewer 2: I think in these steps we kind of hop too quickly to the conclusion without really explaining that the username is retrieved from the database first.

[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (u:User) WHERE u.name = 'LilRob' OR 1=1 WITH true AS hacked MATCH (a) DETACH DELETE ALL; –' SET password = 'newPassword';
----

The malicious code is now run, and all users are deleted!
This is why sanitization should continue to be used, even when the input doesn't appear to be coming directly from a user.

== Role Based Privileges

=== Principle of Least Privilege

The principle of least privilege is the idea that a program or user should have the bare minimum of privileges needed to perform their function.
This means that, for example, if your application is only reading data, then it should have read only access to that data.
The benefit of this is that in the case of a Cypher Injection attack, the injected query is not able to manipulate the data,
as the role executing the hijacked query is limited in its functionality.
With Neo4j, a range of fine-grained access control is available, which can add another layer of protection in case of an injection attack.
See https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/current/authentication-authorization/access-control/[here] for more information on role based privileges in Neo4j.

> == Other Notes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Importing Data
```

Not all inputs can be submitted as parameters.
Maybe some malicious input made it into a CSV file for processing.
A CSV of the names of new students for the year, for example.

[source,cypher]
----
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM "file:///students_2021.csv" AS row
CREATE (s:Student)
SET s.year = 2021, s.name = row.student_name
----

Is this vulnerable to Little Robby Labels?

No, it is not. Cypher injection is still impossible here, even if parameters aren't being used.

The LOAD query is independent of the CSV that is to be processed.
As such, the query is compiled separately from the CSV.
By the time the query is executing and the CSV data starts to be accessed, the query has already been completely compiled, and the CSV data has no opportunity to affect or hijack the query itself.

Likewise, any other injection attacks will fail that attempt to pull in malicious input via reading it from somewhere, or even a malicious property value that somehow was saved into the database already.

> This is because unless the malicious value is string-appended into the query itself, rather than read at the time the query executes, it will not have the opportunity to get compiled into and affect the query plan.

Reviewer 2: This section could perhaps be worked into a little higher in the document. At some point we mention what needs to be parameterised/sanitised, maybe we could also have a section about what doesn't need to be.

Reviewer 2: _Food for thought._

Alternatively, although it's good information, we could delete this section. 

It's one thing to document what needs to be sanitised, and it's another to begin discussing what doesn't need to be. You can't really enumerate all the things which don't need to be sanitised, in the same way that you can't proving a negative.

Reviewer 4: Given the frequency of load and import queries, I think it's important to continue to include this section, and show that malicious input in the source files aren't vulnerable.

----

The solution in this case is to continue passing `studentName` as a parameter to the APOC procedure.

[source,cypher]
----
CALL apoc.cypher.doIt("CREATE (s:Student) SET s.name = $name RETURN true", { name: $studentName })
YIELD value
RETURN value;
----

Little Robby Labels is powerless once more!

Notable APOC procedures:

----
apoc.case()
apoc.when()
apoc.cypher.doIt()
apoc.cypher.run()
apoc.cypher.runMany()
apoc.cypher.runManyReadOnly()
apoc.cypher.runSchema()
apoc.cypher.runTimeboxed()
apoc.cypher.runWrite()
apoc.cypher.runFirstColumnMany()
apoc.cypher.runFirstColumnSingle()
apoc.do.case()
apoc.do.when()
apoc.export.csv.query()
apoc.export.cypher.query()
apoc.export.graphml.query()
apoc.export.json.query()
apoc.graph.fromCypher()
apoc.periodic.commit()
apoc.periodic.iterate()
apoc.periodic.repeat()
apoc.periodic.submit()
apoc.trigger.add()
----

All of the above listed APOC procedures include a way to pass a parameter map to the call, providing protection against injection attacks.

== Query Sanitization

While string concatenation for building queries is generally a bad idea, it is not always possible to avoid it.

> Node labels, relationship types and property names are notable examples where parameterization is not supported in Cypher.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Node labels, relationship types, and property names are notable examples where parameterization is not supported in Cypher.
```

Oxford comma 🙏

The unicode character for the backtick; `\u0060` will also resolve to a backtick and needs to be sanitized.
When handling user input, it is important that the programming language the client is written in is taken into account.
For example, the input: `\u005C\u00750060` may be resolved before being passed to the database as `\u0060`
(`\u005C` is backslash `\`, and `\u0075` is `u`), which will then be resolved by the database as a backtick!

Writing your own sanitization function can be tricky.
That is why it is highly recommended to avoid string concatenation and design your database in such a way that user input
is not needed to dynamically query based on node labels, relationship types and parameters.

=== Validation and Sanitization Common Exploits

Sanitization can also be used as a technique to clean up user input.
Another way of keeping the input safe and clean is to use validation.
Validation checks the input and makes sure it meets a set of certain criteria and will reject the input if it does not,
in comparison to sanitization which cleans the input only.
Validation can be used alongside sanitization. Keep in mind that both techniques come with risks.

> === Whitespace checks

Reviewer 2: If "=== Validation and Sanitization Common Exploits" nested at the 3rd level, then should "=== Whitespace checks" be a child and nested at the 4th level? 

Similar observation about "=== Unicode Encoding" and "=== String Concatenation"

Author: Ah yes, thanks :)

This doesn't really fall into the category of Cypher injection, since it's not an attack on Cypher or the database itself, but it's important to be aware of it.

Stored cross site scripting attacks use values in a database as a vector for attacks on a website.
Malicious values (usually malicious javascript or HTML) are saved to the database,
but when retrieved and displayed on a vulnerable page, these values result in a cross-site scripting attack, or an injection attack, resulting in the malicious code affecting the javascript or HTML on the page.

So the vulnerability is actually in the HTML or Javascript code on the page itself, and has nothing to do with Neo4j.
To mitigate the vulnerability, the HTML and Javascript code used on the page itself ought to be secured such that results from a database call are sanitized before display, inclusion in the DOM, or execution as script.
That said, it may be a good idea to sanitize outside input for HTML/Javascript control characters before saving to the database, so your stored data can't be used as a vector in these kinds of attacks.

It is best practice to do this client-side before passing the sanitized parameters to the database.

> https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-site_scripting#Persistent_(or_stored)

Reviewer 2: This I'm not sure how relevant this post-exploitation vulnerability is to this page. It's more of an architectural vulnerability of a user's application, and doesn't even require Cypher Injection to happen for it to be a vulnerability.

There are so many things that can go wrong once a Cypher Injection is carried out that I'm not sure it's worth focusing on any particular issue. The common link this has to Cypher Injection is that the HTML or JavaScript input has to be sanitised, but we're talking about a completely different type of sanitisation that the generic string-escaping sanitisation logic required to make an application safe from Cypher injection.

My vote would be to remove this section from this article.

Author: Yeah, I only left it in because I felt a little strange deleting an entire section from the original article, but I agree it is not so relevant :) Will remove it

`"bobby@mail.com' RETURN user.username STARTS WITH 'a';//`

If the username starts with an `a`, the query resolves to true and the login page is shown.
In this way, Robby can, character by character, figure out the username belonging to his older brother is by systematically checking each character's response.

=== Error Based Cypher Injection

Another way of gaining access to information is if the malicious actor exploits the error messages returned by the client application.
This can be done by injecting faulty input which will output different error messages, and based on these messages gain sensitive information about the database.
This information can be used to craft a more powerful injection with the next payload.
This could be as simple as adding an additional quote to see if the server will return the whole db error back.
Here is an example of another simple exploit input:

`Input: ' RETURN a//`

[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (s:Student) WHERE s.name = '' RETURN a//' RETURN s;
----

Which results in the following database error:

----

Variable `a` not defined (line 1, column 44 (offset: 43))
"MATCH (s:Student) WHERE s.name = '' RETURN a//' RETURN s;"

>                                             ^

Author: Ah yeah, adoc ignores it, but for consistency I'll remove them :)

CREATE (s:Student)
SET s.name = $studentName
----

When using parameters like this, it is impossible for the parameter to escape the query, stopping any attempts at Cypher Injection.

This is because parameters are separate from the query. The query alone is compiled into an executable plan, and once compiled, can use any parameter map for execution.

In other words, once a query plan has been compiled, it is set, and nothing in the data submitted to it can change it, alter it, or hijack it.

This type of protection is the easiest and safest way to protect against Cypher Injection on literals, unfortunately, not everything in a query is parameterizable.

It is also important to remember that not all injection attacks rely on quotation escaping of string literals,
for example the following query, for a number literal, is still vulnerable when not using parameterization.

`query = "MATCH (user) WHERE user.id =" + userid + ";"`

Where the malicious userid input is: `"1 OR 1 = 1 WITH DISTINCT true AS haxxored MATCH (all) DETACH DELETE all; //"`
This can also be easily fixed by using parameters:

[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (user) WHERE user.id = $userid;
----

== Parameters and APOC

> APOC is a widely used, officially supported plugin available for installation with Neo4j.

Author: hmm not sure tbh, mentioning it almost brings more attention to it 😅

> APOC is a widely used, officially supported plugin available for installation with Neo4j.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we could just have the following: "APOC Is a widely used plugin available for installation with Neo4j." Agree with Nadja that it's a little misleading, and I can see Gem's point too.

quotation or removing delimiters which would prematurely be interpreted as the end of a string literal or identifier.
Sanitization should always be done when accepting untrusted external input and may be needed other times, see second order injections for more information.

It is recommended that this sanitization is done at the client level, before passing it down to the database.

=== Escape Characters in Cypher

Escape characters invoke an alternative meaning on the following characters in the sequence.
In Cypher, the definition of string literals, regular expressions and identifiers such as node labels can be done
with the opening and closing of certain characters that can also be used inside the expression given it is escaped correctly.

In the following sections we will explain how to escape delimiters of different Cypher types.

[cols="1,1,1,1"]
|===
|Cypher Type |Character Type |Character |Escape Sequence

.4+|String Literals
|Single Quote
|'
|\' or \u005c'

|Unicode Single Quote
|\u0027
|\u005c\u0027

|Double Quote
|"
|\" or \u005c"

|Unicode Double Quote
|\u0022

> |\u005c\u0022

Author: \\u0022 I assume you meant :)

.2+|Identifiers
|Backtick Quote
|`
|``

|Unicode Identifiers
|\u0060

> |\u0060\u0060 or `\u0060

Author: I tested it as well and it works for me...

> |\u0060\u0060 or `\u0060

Reviewer 3: Yikes, indeed! I think we need to be careful about this one, as it is not working for cypher itself. It's probably some browser specific logic.

=== When Sanitization is Necessary

Node labels, relationship types and parameters may contain non-alphabetic characters, including numbers, symbols and whitespace characters, but must be escaped using backticks.
For example: `node label with spaces`.
This means that when dynamically building a query using string concatenation, sanitization needs to be done on the escaping of backticks.
In Cypher, a backtick is escaped using another backtick `&#96;&#96;`.
For other types, for example string literals, that are opened and closed with either single quotes `'` or double quotes `"`,
the sanitization would be done by escaping the quote character with a backslash `\`.
Note however that where string literals can be used, so can parameters, and it is recommended to always parameterize instead of sanitize the input to avoid Cypher Injection.

Here is an example of a simple dynamic label injection attack:

`query = "MATCH (s:School)-[:IN]->(c:&#96;" + cityName + "&#96;) RETURN s;`

With this query we want to search for all schools that are in a certain city, unfortunately our city names are Node Labels,
so it isn't possible to parameterize the input.

A possible attack input would be:

> `Input = &#96;) RETURN 1 as a UNION MATCH (n) RETURN 1 WITH DISTINCT true AS haxxored MATCH (n) DETACH DELETE n; \\`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`Input = &#96;) RETURN 1 as a UNION MATCH (n) RETURN 1 WITH DISTINCT true AS haxxored MATCH (n) DETACH DELETE n; //`
```

The backtick escapes the label name context and the parentheses closes the node.
The `UNION` here then ensures that a match is made, as if the first `MATCH` statement doesn't return anything, the next part of the query won't be run.
The `WITH` reduces the result set down to one row and then the final part will delete everything in the database.

This attack was not possible to avoid using parameterization.
To avoid this attack sanitization must be used.

[Note]
====
The best protection against Cypher Injection is to always parameterize user input.
If possible, update your data model to avoid needing to query using dynamic labels.
In this example, the refactoring would be to move the city name to a parameter.

`MATCH (c: City { name: $cityName }) RETURN name`
====

> It is possible to add validation to the user input as well, in this case, validating the city name is a real city name before passing it into the database, and rejecting it otherwise.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is possible to add validation to the user input as well. In the above example, a real city name should probably not contain special characters such as a backtick or a colon. Validating the city name before passing it into the database, and rejecting suspicious input could help you to avoid cypher injection.
```

Plot twist: I would probably validate a city is real with a database call 😏. could we add this to the validation section? It feels like going back and forth between sanitization and validation otherwise.

Author: Hahaha noooo how could you!?!? :P 

I feel like it fits here personally

The sanitization needed for this query is escaping the additional backtick character.

> `SanitizedInput = &#96;&#96;) RETURN 1 as a UNION MATCH (n) RETURN 1 WITH DISTINCT true AS haxxored MATCH (n) DETACH DELETE n; \\`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`SanitizedInput = &#96;&#96;) RETURN 1 as a UNION MATCH (n) RETURN 1 WITH DISTINCT true AS haxxored MATCH (n) DETACH DELETE n; //`
```

Author: My Cypher skills are clearly on point 🤪

> The additional backtick added now ensures that the entire string is used as the node label, and not able to break out of that context.

Reviewer 3: Should we mention that `//` is not considered as a comment either? Not sure if it's necessary.

Author: I think it is fine to leave out :)

For example; the single quote character `'` can be encoded as `\u0027`.
When sanitizing a string for the removal of escape quotation characters, it is important to also check for the unicode equivalent.
The following query doesn't look like it escapes the string at first glance:

`"Robby\u0027 MATCH (s:Student) DETACH DELETE s //"`

But in reality, Cypher will resolve the unicode into a single quote and treat it as such in the compilation of the query.

When validating input such as usernames, it is often done to check the absence of reserved keywords, such as admin.
Unicode encoding can be used as another common bypass for this.
For example the user input `\u0061\u0064\u006d\u0069\u006e` is the unicode for `admin`:

[source,cypher]
----
CREATE (n {username: '\u0061\u0064\u006d\u0069\u006e'}) RETURN n.username
----

.Results
[opts="header"]
|===
|n.username
|"Admin"
|===

=== String Concatenation

Another method to bypass validation of particular keywords is using string concatenation in the injection.
For example, validation that the user isn’t setting their username to admin could be bypassed with the injection:

> `"ad' + 'min'"`

Reviewer 3: Technically in Cypher this will not work unless they are the same quotes, and we do not allow expressions for identifiers at all 🤔. Maybe I'm missing something and the strings are existing in the application code, but then I think we should mention this.

```suggestion
`'ad' + 'min'`
```

Author: Ah, it is actually that I had one too many quotes. The idea is that this was added as an injection creating this query, for example:

`CREATE (s) SET s.name = 'ad' + 'min' RETURN s`

As the username is received from the user directly, our application sets it user a parameter.

`:param username => "LilRob' OR 1=1 WITH true AS hacked MATCH (all) DETACH DELETE all; //"`

[source,cypher]
----
CREATE (u:User) SET u.username = $username;
----

Now that an account is made, Little Robby Tables logs in and goes to the settings to change his username.
The database retrieves his current username and uses client-side string concatenation to build a query to update it.

`query = "MATCH (u:User) WHERE u.username = '" + username + "' SET u.username = $newUsername;"`

This query is executed as:

[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (u:User) WHERE u.username = 'LilRob' OR 1=1 WITH true AS hacked MATCH (all) DETACH DELETE all; //' SET u.username = $newUsername;
----

The malicious code is now run, and all users are deleted!
This is why sanitization should continue to be used, even when the input doesn't appear to be coming directly from a user.

== Role Based Privileges

=== Principle of Least Privilege

The principle of least privilege is the idea that a program or user should have the bare minimum of privileges needed to perform their function.

> This means that, for example, if your application is only reading data, then it should have read only access to that data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, if your application is only reading data, then it should have read only access to that data.
```

The benefit of this is that in the case of a Cypher Injection attack, an injected query is not able to manipulate the data,

> as the role executing the hijacked query is limited in its functionality.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
as the role executing the hijacked query is limited to only reading data.
```
Thought this might be clearer. Either works, though.

With Neo4j, a range of fine-grained access control is available, which can add another layer of protection in case of an injection attack.

> See https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/current/authentication-authorization/access-control/[here] for more information on role based privileges in Neo4j.

Reviewer 3: Should we: 
* mention this is only possible in the enterprise version
* explicitely mention restricting procedures that are not needed (could be about whitelisting procedures from a jar as well)

Author: There are still roles available in community I thought, e.g read? or do I have that wrong?

I can try to add something about allowlists :)

Reviewer 2: AFAIK, in community edition these permissions are not available, and every user is essentially acting as an admin (eg they can do everything).

Reviewer 2: I don't know if we need to focus on any particular setting (eg procedure.allowlist) but I think we should perhaps say that principle of least privilege can be controlled both via RBAC and configuration settings.

Author: Wow, I didn't realise community was so limited! Will mention enterprise then :) 

I like that suggestion Daniel! thanks, will generalize it a little :D

== Importing Data

Not all inputs can be submitted as parameters.
Maybe some malicious input made it into a CSV file for processing.
A CSV of the names of new students for the year, for example.

[source,cypher]
----

> LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM "file:///students_2021.csv" AS row

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM $filepath AS row
```
I think we should take our own advice and use a parameter here.

Author: This isn't coming from a user so it doesn't matter. But sure :)

Author: Hmm actually, as it is mentioned about parameters below, I won't do this. The assumption is this query is not using string concatenation already and adding a parameter will make it confiusing

CREATE (s:Student)
SET s.year = 2021, s.name = row.student_name
----

Is this vulnerable to Little Robby Labels?

> No, it is not. Cypher injection is still impossible here, even if parameters aren't being used.

Reviewer 3: I don't know where you would use this parameter if not for the filepath. If it reference the filepath, you could definitely still do a cypher injection (if it's written on a single line), e.g:
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM "file:///students_2021.csv" as row <do whatever>//AS row CREATE (s:Student) SET s.year = 2021, s.name = row.student_name
 Otherwise please add this in the explanation :)

Author: I think this example makes sense still, it isn't talking about the filepath, it is talking about row.student_name. It is making it clear that it doesn't matter what is *inside* the file as it can't affect the query.

Reviewer 3: The part that I'm confused about is that you can't parameterize row.student_name at all in currenct Cypher.

Author: Would it help if I wrote instead:

No, it is not. Cypher injection is still impossible here, even though parameters can't be used for the row data.

Reviewer 3: Yes, I think that would help :)
